# MATAR: A performance portability and productivity implementation of data-oriented design with Kokkos
Paper by Daniel Dunning, Nathaniel Morgan, Jacob Moore, Eappen Nelluvelil, Tanya Tafolla, Robert Robey  
Presentation by Luuk de Graaf  
Summary by Simon van Hus (6147879)

---

This paper introduces a library called MATAR that provide high-performance data-structures to C++.
The key concept the paper explores is the representation of data structures in memory and specifically cache.
To make sure these structures can be efficiently accessed the authors seek to make sure they are stored contiguously in cache, which allows for quick accessing.
They specifically explore 2D arrays (as matrices), ragged arrays, and sparse matrices.
The authors also implement array views, which provide customizable ways of interpreting arrays, allowing for introduction of new data structures at no additional performance costs.

To evaluate their implementation, they compare their implementation to native implementations.
They find that for regular arrays, unsurprisingly their data-first approach is faster than traditional arrays.
Due to the default for matrices being accessed row-major, theirs no speedup in the benchmark for matrix multiplication, however accessing the second matrix in a column-major manner does create large performance increases.
For ragged data structures MATAR also underperforms, seemingly due to a significantly higher amount of cache misses.

All in all, the paper shows that data-oriented design can be quicker, but that the difference it makes are only really noticeable in high-throughput or high-volume applications.